New Patterns chapter (#489)
neo4j/docs-cypher: modules/ROOT/pages/patterns/concepts.adoc

----

Adding a label expression to the node pattern means only nodes with labels that match will be returned.
The following matches nodes that have the `Stop` label:

[source, role=noheader]
----
MATCH (n:Stop)
----

The following more complex label expression matches all nodes that are either a `TrainStation` and a `BusStation` or `StationGroup`:

[source, role=noheader]
----
MATCH (n:(TrainStation&BusStation)|StationGroup)
----

A map of property names and values can be used to match on node properties based on equality with the specified values.
The following matches nodes that have their `mode` property equal to `Rail`:

[source, role=noheader]
----
MATCH (n { mode: "Rail" }) 
----

More general predicates can be expressed with a `WHERE` clause.
The following matches nodes whose name property matches the regular expression `Preston.*`:

[source, role=noheader]
----
MATCH (n:Station WHERE n.name =~ "Preston.*")
----

See the xref:patterns/reference.adoc#node-patterns[node patterns] reference section for more details. 

[[relationship-patterns]]
== Relationship patterns

The simplest possible relationship pattern is a pair of dashes:

[source, role=noheader]
----
--
----

> This pattern matches a relationship with any direction and does not filter on any relationship type or property. 

Reviewer: What do you have against contractions?? 😄

-[r]-
----

To match a specific direction, add `<` or `>` to the left or right hand side respectively:

[source, role=noheader]
----
-[r]->
----

To match on a relationship type, add the type name after a colon:

[source, role=noheader]
----
-[:CALLS_AT]->
----

Similar to node patterns, a map of property names and values can be added to filter on properties of the relationship based on equality with the specified values:

[source, role=noheader]
----
-[{ distance: 0.24, duration: "PT4M" }]->
----

A `WHERE` clause can be used for more general predicates:

[source, role=noheader]
----
-[r WHERE time() + duration(r.duration) < time("22:00") ]->
----

See the xref:patterns/reference.adoc#relationship-patterns[relationship patterns] reference section for more details. 

[[path-patterns]]
== Path patterns

Any valid path starts and ends with a node, with relationships between each node (if there is more than one node).
Path patterns have the same restrictions, and for all valid path patterns the following are true:

* They have at least one node pattern.
* They begin and end with a node pattern.
* They alternate between nodes and relationships.

[options="header"cols="2a,1a"]
|===

> | Valid path patterns | Invalid path patterns 

Reviewer: The table suggests there are relationships between entries on a row, which is incorrect.

Reviewer: For example,`()` is not related to `\-->`. By placing them on the same row, the reader may think some relationship between them is implied. The same applies to the other rows.

| `()` | `-->`
| `(s)--(e)` | `()-->`

> | `(:Station)--()<--(m WHERE m.departs > time(12:00))-->()-[:NEXT]->(n)` | `()-->-->()`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `()` | `\-->`
| `(s)--(e)` | `()\-->`
| `(:Station)--()<\--(m WHERE m.departs > time(12:00))\-->()-[:NEXT]->(n)` | `()\-->\-->()`
```

Those ligatures again.

The following code block is used for the example:

[source,cypher, role=test-setup]
----
CREATE (pmr:Station {name: 'Peckham Rye'}),
  (dmk:Station {name: 'Denmark Hill'}),
  (vic:Station {name: 'London Victoria'}),
  (clp:Station {name: 'Clapham High Street'}),
  (eph:Station {name: 'Elephant & Castle'}),
  (vic)<-[:CALLS_AT]-(s1:Stop {departs: time('11:55')}),
  (dmk)<-[:CALLS_AT]-(s2:Stop {departs: time('11:44')})-[:NEXT]->(s1),
  (pmr)<-[:CALLS_AT]-(s3:Stop {departs: time('11:40')})-[:NEXT]->(s2),
  (clp)<-[:CALLS_AT]-(s4:Stop {departs: time('11:41')}),
  (dmk)<-[:CALLS_AT]-(s5:Stop {departs: time('11:37')})-[:NEXT]->(s4),
  (pmr)<-[:CALLS_AT]-(s6:Stop {departs: time('11:33')})-[:NEXT]->(s5),
  (eph)<-[:CALLS_AT]-(s7:Stop {departs: time('11:54')}),
  (dmk)<-[:CALLS_AT]-(s8:Stop {departs: time('11:47')})-[:NEXT]->(s7),
  (pmr)<-[:CALLS_AT]-(s9:Stop {departs: time('11:44')})-[:NEXT]->(s8)
----

It creates the following graph:

image::path_pattern_example_graph.svg[width="600",role="middle"]

The graph contains a number of train `Stations` and `Stops`.
A `Stop` represents  the arrival and departure of a train that `CALLS_AT` a `Station`. 

> Each `Stop` forms part of a sequence of `Stops` connected by the `NEXT` relationship type that represents the order of calling points made by a train service. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each `Stop` forms part of a sequence of `Stops` connected by relationships with the type `NEXT`, representing the order of calling points made by a train service.
```

To say that the Stops are connected by types is not quite right.

The graph shows three chains of `Stops` that represent different train services. 
Each of these services calls at the `Station` with the name `Denmark Hill`.

To return all `Stops` that call at the `Station` `Denmark Hill`, the following _motif_ is used (the term motif is used to describe the pattern looked for in the graph):

image::path_pattern_motif.svg[width="600",role="middle"]

> In this case, three path patterns in the graph match the structure of the motif (plus the predicate anchoring to the `Station` `Denmark Hill`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this case, three paths in the graph match the structure of the motif (plus the predicate anchoring to the `Station` `Denmark Hill`):
```

The pattern matches the paths.

image::path_pattern_solutions.svg[width="700",role="middle"]

In order to return the name of each `Stop` that calls at a `Station`, declare a variable in the `Stop` node pattern.
The results will then have a row containing the departs value of each `Stop` for each match shown above:

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (s:Stop)-[:CALLS_AT]->(:Station {name: "Denmark Hill"})
RETURN s.departs AS departureTime
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="1*<m"]
|===
| +departureTime+

| +"11:44:00Z"+
| +"11:47:00Z"+
| +"11:37:00Z"+

1+d|Rows: 3
|===

[[equijoins]]
== Equijoins 

_Equijoins were introduced in Neo4j 5.7._

An equijoin is an operation on paths that requires more than one of the nodes or relationships of the paths to be the same.
The equality between the nodes or relationships is specified by declaring the same variable in multiple node patterns or relationship patterns.
An equijoin allows cycles to be specified in a path pattern.
See xref:patterns/concepts#graph-patterns[graph patterns] for more complex patterns.

To illustrate how equijoins work, we will use the problem of finding a round trip between two `Stations`.

> For this example, a new code block is needed:

Reviewer: Should we be call this something other than 'code block'? That is a formatting device. I found this example in the MATCH clause section: 

"To recreate the graph, run the following query against an empty Neo4j database:"

Author: Will make consistent for all examples on the page.

////
[source, cypher, role=test-setup]
----
MATCH (n)
DETACH DELETE (n)
----
Deletes the graph used in the previous example.
////

[source, cypher, role=test-setup]
----
CREATE (bhi:Station {name: "Birmingham Int'l"}),
  (cov:Station {name: 'Coventry'}),
  (eus:Station  {name: 'London Euston'}),
  (bhi)<-[:CALLS_AT]-(s1:Stop {departs: time('12:03')}),
  (cov)<-[:CALLS_AT]-(s2:Stop {departs: time('11:33')})-[:NEXT]->(s1),
  (eus)<-[:CALLS_AT]-(s3:Stop {departs: time('15:54')}),
  (cov)<-[:CALLS_AT]-(s4:Stop {departs: time('14:45')})-[:NEXT]->(s3),
  (cov)<-[:CALLS_AT]-(s5:Stop {departs: time('09:34')}),
  (eus)<-[:CALLS_AT]-(s6:Stop {departs: time('08:40')})-[:NEXT]->(s5)
----

It creates the following graph:

image::patterns_equijoins.svg[width="700",role="middle"]

> In this example-scenario, a passenger starts their journey at `Euston` `Station` in London and ends at `Coventry` `Station`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example scenario, a passenger starts their outbound journey at `London Euston` `Station` and ends at `Coventry` `Station`.
```

The hyphen looked odd. 

The station is called 'London Euston' in the dataset and in any journey planner.

The return journey will be the reverse order of those `Stations`.

The graph has three different services, two of which would compose the desired round trip, and a third which would send the passenger to `Birmingham International`.

The solution is the following path with a cycle:

image::patterns_equijoins_solution2.svg[width="400",role="middle"]

If unique properties exist on the node where the cycle "join" occurs in the path, then it is possible to repeat the node pattern with a predicate matching on the unique property. 

> The following motif demonstrates how that can be achieved, repeating a `Station` node pattern with the name `London Euston`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following motif demonstrates how that can be achieved, repeating a `Station` node pattern with the name `London Euston`:
```

image::patterns_equijoins_motif.svg[width="700",role="middle"]

The path pattern equivalent is:

.Query
[source, syntax]
----
MATCH (:Station {name: "London Euston"})<-[:CALLS_AT]-(:Stop)-[:NEXT]->(:Stop)
  -[:CALLS_AT]->(:Station {name: "Coventry"})<-[:CALLS_AT]-(:Stop)
  -[:NEXT]->(:Stop)-[:CALLS_AT]->(:Station {name: "London Euston"})
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===

| outbound | return

| "08:40:00Z-09:34:00Z" | "14:45:00Z-15:54:00Z"

2+d|Rows: 1

> |===

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[source, syntax]
----
(:Station {name: "London Euston"})<-[:CALLS_AT]-(:Stop)-[:NEXT]->(:Stop)
  -[:CALLS_AT]->(:Station {name: "Coventry"})<-[:CALLS_AT]-(:Stop)
  -[:NEXT]->(:Stop)-[:CALLS_AT]->(:Station {name: "London Euston"})
----
```

This was not meant to be a runnable query, just the path pattern. The results table was copied by mistake.

To understand the semantics of this pattern, it helps to work through the expansion of the repetitions.
Here are the three repetitions specified by the quantifier, combined into a union of path patterns:

[source, role=noheader]
----
(:Stop)-[:NEXT]->(:Stop) |
(:Stop)-[:NEXT]->(:Stop)(:Stop)-[:NEXT]->(:Stop) |
(:Stop)-[:NEXT]->(:Stop)(:Stop)-[:NEXT]->(:Stop)(:Stop)-[:NEXT]->(:Stop)
----

The union operator (`|`) here is used for illustration only; using it this way is not part of Cypher syntax.
Where two node patterns are next to each other in the expansion above, they must necessarily match the same node: the next segment of a `Service` starts where the previous segment ends.
As such they can be rewritten as a single node pattern with any filtering condition combined conjunctively.
In this example this is trivial, because the filtering applied to those nodes is just the label `Stop`:

image::patterns_qpp_illustration.svg[width="400",role="middle"]

With this, the union of path patterns simplifies to:

[source, role=noheader]
----
(:Stop)-[:NEXT]->(:Stop) |
(:Stop)-[:NEXT]->(:Stop)-[:NEXT]->(:Stop) |
(:Stop)-[:NEXT]->(:Stop)-[:NEXT]->(:Stop)-[:NEXT]->(:Stop)
----

> The segments of the original path pattern that connect the `Stations` to the `Stops` can also be rewritten.'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The segments of the original path pattern that connect the `Stations` to the `Stops` can also be rewritten.
```

Here is what those segments look like when concatenated with the first repetition:

[source, role=noheader]
----
(:Station { name: "Denmark Hill" })<-[:CALLS_AT]-(:Stop)
(:Stop)-[:NEXT]->(:Stop)
(:Stop)-[:CALLS_AT]->(:Station { name: "Clapham Junction" })
----

The original `MATCH` clause now has the following three parts:

image::patterns_qpp_query_breakdown.svg[]

Translating the union of fixed-length path patterns into a quantified path pattern results in a pattern that will return the correct paths.
The following query adds a `RETURN` clause that yields the departure and arrival times of the two services:

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (:Station { name: "Denmark Hill" })<-[:CALLS_AT]-(d:Stop)
      ((:Stop)-[:NEXT]->(:Stop)){1,3}
      (a:Stop)-[:CALLS_AT]->(:Station { name: "Clapham Junction" })
RETURN d.departs AS departureTime, a.arrives AS arrivalTime
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===

| departureTime | arrivalTime

| 17:10Z | 17:17Z

> | 17:07Z | 17:19Z

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| "17:07:00Z" | "17:19:00Z"
| "17:10:00Z" | "17:17:00Z"
```

Update to match Browser results.

----
MATCH (d:Station { name: "Denmark Hill" })<-[:CALLS_AT]-(n:Stop)
      ((:Stop)-[:NEXT]->(:Stop)){1,10} 
      (m:Stop)-[:CALLS_AT]->(a:Station { name: "Clapham Junction" })
AND m.arrives < time('17:18')
RETURN n.departs AS departureTime
----

If the relationship `NEXT` only connects `Stop` nodes, the `:Stop` label expressions can be removed:

.Query
[source, cypher, role=test-skip-result]
----
MATCH (d:Station { name: "Denmark Hill" })<-[:CALLS_AT]-(n:Stop)
      (()-[:NEXT]->()){1,10} 
      (m:Stop)-[:CALLS_AT]->(a:Station { name: "Clapham Junction" })
AND m.arrives < time('17:18')
RETURN n.departs AS departureTime
----

When the quantified path pattern has one relationship pattern, it can be abbreviated to a _quantified relationship_.
A quantified relationship is a relationship pattern with a postfix quantifier. 
Below is the previous query rewritten with a quantified relationship:

.Query
[source, cypher, role=test-skip-result]
----
MATCH (d:Station { name: "Denmark Hill" })<-[:CALLS_AT]-
        (n:Stop)-[:NEXT]->{1,10}(m:Stop)-[:CALLS_AT]->
        (a:Station { name: "Clapham Junction" })
AND m.arrives < time('17:18')
RETURN n.departs AS departureTime
----

> The scope of the quantifier `{1,10}` is the relationship pattern `-[:NEXT]->` and not the node patterns abutting it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The scope of the quantifier `{1,10}` is the relationship pattern `-[:NEXT]\->` and not the node patterns abutting it.
```

The following table shows the bindings for both matches, including the variable origin.
In contrast to the group variables, `origin` is a singleton variable due to being declared outside the quantification.
Singleton variables bind at most to one node or relationship.

[options="header",cols="4*<m"]
|===

| origin | l | r | m

| n2 | [n2, n3, n4] | [r2, r3, r4] | [n3, n4, n5]
| n7 | [n7] | [r8] | [n8]

|===

Returning to the original goal, which was to return the sequence of depart times for the `Stops` and the total distance of each service, the final query exploits the compatibility of group variables with list comprehensions and list functions such as xref::functions/list#functions-reduce[reduce()]: 

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (:Station {name: "Denmark Hill"})<-[:CALLS_AT]-(origin)
      ((l)-[r:NEXT]->(m)){1,3}
      ()-[:CALLS_AT]->(:Station {name: "Clapham Junction"})
RETURN origin.departs + [stop in m | stop.departs] AS departureTimes,
       reduce(acc = 0, next in r | acc + next.distance) as totalDistance
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===

| departureTime | totalDistance

| ["17:07", "17:11", "17:13", "17:19"] | 1.4

> | ["17:10", "17:17"] | 1.4

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| departureTimes | totalDistance

| ["17:10:00Z", "17:20:00Z"] | 1.4
| ["17:07:00Z", "17:11:00Z", "17:13:00Z", "17:20:00Z"] | 1.4
```

  bmv.location = point({longitude: -2.04978, latitude: 52.3206}),
  cnm.location = point({longitude: -2.09962, latitude: 51.8974}),
  dtw.location = point({longitude: -2.15836, latitude: 52.2682}),
  hby.location = point({longitude: -2.22112, latitude: 52.33449}),
  psh.location = point({longitude: -2.07154, latitude: 52.13055}),
  wop.location = point({longitude: -2.16003, latitude: 52.15605}),
  wof.location = point({longitude: -2.2216, latitude: 52.19514}),
  wos.location = point({longitude: -2.20941, latitude: 52.19473})
CREATE (asc)-[:LINK {distance: 7.25}]->(cnm), 
  (asc)-[:LINK {distance: 11.29}]->(wop), 
  (asc)-[:LINK {distance: 14.75}]->(wos), 
  (bmv)-[:LINK {distance: 31.14}]->(cnm), 
  (bmv)-[:LINK {distance: 6.16}]->(dtw), 
  (bmv)-[:LINK {distance: 12.6}]->(wop), 
  (dtw)-[:LINK {distance: 5.64}]->(hby), 
  (dtw)-[:LINK {distance: 6.03}]->(wof), 
  (dtw)-[:LINK {distance: 5.76}]->(wos), 
  (psh)-[:LINK {distance: 4.16}]->(wop), 
  (wop)-[:LINK {distance: 3.71}]->(wos), 
  (wof)-[:LINK {distance: 0.65}]->(wos)
----

It creates the following graph:

image::patterns_shortestpath_graph.svg[width="500", role="middle"]

> === shortestPath

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== shortestPath()
```

This would be consistent with the Functions chapter. Otherwise I think the headings currently used in MATCH are preferable.

Author: I think excluding the brackets would be preferable here - will use what is currently in the MATCH chapter (and once I get to improving the functions chapter I will have a closer look at whether or not we always need to add an empty parenthesis after a function name.)

It needs to be a variable-length relationship with a single relationship pattern.
For more information, see the reference section on xref::patterns/reference#variable-length_relationships[variable-length relationships].

=== shortestPath with predicates

If the `MATCH` clause of the `shortestPath` function includes a `WHERE` clause, a shortest path that satisfies the `WHERE` clause conditions is returned if one exists.
This is different to first finding the shortest path using the path pattern and then applying the WHERE clause condition, which could potentially return no results.

For example, the following query returns the shortest path, with the condition that the distance between stations is never `20` miles or more:

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
MATCH p = shortestPath((hby)-[:LINK*]-(cnm))
WHERE all(link in relationships(p) WHERE link.distance < 20) AND
      hby.name = "Hartlebury" AND cnm.name = "Cheltenham Spa"
RETURN [n in nodes(p) | n.name] AS stops
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="1*<m"]
|===

| stops

| ["Hartlebury", "Droitwich Spa", "Worcester Shrub Hill", "Ashchurch", "Cheltenham Spa"]

1+d|Rows: 1

|===

> If the evaluation of the `WHERE` clause conditions is forced to happen after the `shortestPath` function returns a solution, e.g., by moving the `WHERE` clause so it comes after a `WITH` clause, the shortest path found will include `LINK`s with `distance` greater than `20`, which will subsequently get filtered out:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the evaluation of the `WHERE` clause conditions is forced to happen after the `shortestPath` function returns a solution, for example by moving the `WHERE` clause so it comes after a `WITH` clause, the shortest path found will include `LINK` relationships with `distance` greater than `20`, which will subsequently get filtered out:
```

Pluralising a code block like `LINK` doesn't seem to work.

WITH p
WHERE all(link in relationships(p) WHERE link.distance < 20)
RETURN [n in nodes(p) | n.name] AS stops
----

.Result
[source, cypher, role=noheader]
----
(no changes, no records)
----

When the predicate of the `WHERE` clause can be checked during the search for the shortest path as in the previous example, then solutions can be found efficiently.
If, however, the predicate requires evaluation of the whole path before being checked, then a more exhaustive search may need to be done first.
This can have a significant impact on performance.
For example, the following query requires the whole path to determine the total distance between the endpoints:

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
MATCH p = shortestPath((hby)-[link:LINK*]-(cnm))
WHERE reduce(acc = 0, l in link | acc + l.distance) > 50 AND
      hby.name = "Hartlebury" AND cnm.name = "Cheltenham Spa"
RETURN [n in nodes(p) | n.name] AS stops
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="1*<m"]
|===
| stops

| ["Hartlebury", "Droitwich Spa", "Worcester Shrub Hill", "Worcestershire Parkway Ll", "Bromsgrove", "Cheltenham Spa"]

1+d|Rows: 1

|===

On a large, highly connected graph, this can be very time consuming.

> See xref::execution-plans/shortestpath-planning.adoc[] for more information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See section on xref:execution-plans/shortestpath-planning.adoc[shortest path planning] for more information.
```

> === allShortestPaths

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== allShortestPaths()
```

The `allShortestPaths` function finds all paths between two nodes that have the minimum number of relationships. For example, the following returns the two shortest paths between `Hartlebury` and `Pershore`:

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
MATCH p = allShortestPaths((hby)-[link:LINK*]-(psh))
WHERE hby.name = "Hartlebury" AND psh.name = "Pershore"
RETURN [n in nodes(p) | n.name] AS stops
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="1*<m"]
|===
| stops

| ["Hartlebury", "Droitwich Spa", "Bromsgrove", "Worcestershire Parkway Ll", "Pershore"]

| ["Hartlebury", "Droitwich Spa", "Worcester Shrub Hill", "Worcestershire Parkway Ll", "Pershore"]

> 2+d|Rows: 2

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1+d|Rows: 2
```

|===

[[predicates-in-qpps]]
== Predicates in quantified path patterns

One of the pitfalls of quantified path patterns is that, depending on the graph, they can end up matching very large numbers of paths, resulting in a slow query performance. 
This is especially true when searching for paths with a large maximum length or when the pattern is too general. However, by using inline predicates that specify precisely which nodes and relationships should be included in the results, unwanted results will be pruned as the graph is traversed.

Here are some examples of the types of constraints you can impose on quantified path pattern traversals:

* Nodes must have certain combinations of labels.
For example, all nodes must be an `Employee`, but not a `Contractor`.
* Relationships must have certain types.
For example, all relationships in the path must be of type `EMPLOYED_BY`.
* Nodes or relationships must have properties satisfying some condition. 
For example, all relationships must have property `distance` `>` `10`.

> The same example used in the xref:patterns/concepts.adoc#shortest-path[] section above is used here to illustrate the use of inline predicates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The same example used in the xref:patterns/concepts.adoc#shortest-path[shortest path] section above is used here to illustrate the use of inline predicates.
```

  AS distance
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="1*<m"]
|===
| distance

| 42.94

1+d|Rows: 1

|===

Whether this is the shortest path by distance can be checked by looking at each path between the two end `Stations` and returning the first result after ordering by `distance`:

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (hby:Station {name: "Hartlebury"}),
      (cnm:Station {name: "Cheltenham Spa"})
MATCH p = (hby)-[:LINK]-+(cnm)
RETURN reduce(acc = 0, r in relationships(p) | acc + r.distance) 
  AS distance
ORDER BY distance LIMIT 1
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="1*<m"]
|===
| distance

| 33.4

1+d|Rows: 1
|===

This shows that there is a route with a shorter distance than the one with fewer `Stations`.
For a small dataset, this query will be fast, but the execution time will increase exponentially with the graph size.
For a real dataset, such as the entire rail network of the UK, it will be unacceptably long.

One approach to avoid the exponential explosion in paths is to put a finite upper bound to the quantified path pattern.
This works fine where the solution is known to lie within some range of hops.

> But in cases where this is not known, one alternative would be to make the pattern more specific by, e.g,. adding node labels, or by specifying a relationship direction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But in cases where this is not known, one alternative would be to make the pattern more specific by, for example, adding node labels, or by specifying a relationship direction.
```

Another alternative would be to add an inline predicate to the quantified path pattern.

In this example, an inline predicate can be added that exploits the geospatial property location of the `Stations`: for each pair of `Stations` on the path, the second `Station` will be closer to the endpoint (not always true, but is assumed here to keep the example simple).
To compose the predicate, the xref:functions/spatial.adoc#functions-distance[point.distance() function] is used to compare the distance of the left-hand and the right-hand `Station` to the destination `Cheltenham Spa`:

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (hby:Station {name: "Hartlebury"}),
      (cnm:Station {name: "Cheltenham Spa"})
MATCH p = (hby)
          ((a)-[:LINK]-(b) WHERE point.distance(a.location, cnm.location) > 

>             point.distance(b.location, cnm.location))+(cnm)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            point.distance(b.location, cnm.location))+ (cnm)
```

----

It creates the following graph, showing the train services the passenger can use:

image::patterns_graph_patterns_graph1.svg[width="400", role="middle"]

The solution to the problem assembles a set of path patterns matching the following three parts: the stopping service; the express service; and the final leg of the journey from `Leeds` to `Huddersfield`.
Each changeover, from stopping to express service and from express to onward service, has to respect the fact that the arrival time of a previous leg has to be before the departure time of the next leg.
This will be encoded in a single `WHERE` clause.

The following visualizes the three legs with different colors, and identifies the node variables used to create the equijoins and anchoring:

image::patterns_graph_patterns_graph2.svg[width="300", role="middle"]

For the stopping service, it is assumed that the station the passenger needs to change at is unknown.
As a result, the pattern needs to match a variable number of stops before and after the `Stop` `b`, the `Stop` that calls at the changeover station `l`.

> This is achieved by placing the quantified relationship `-[:NEXT]->*` on each side of node `b`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is achieved by placing the quantified relationship `-[:NEXT]\->*` on each side of node `b`.
```
Escaping to avoid ligature.

Similarly, another quantified relationship that bridges the stops calling at `Leeds` station and `Huddersfield` station is added:

[source, role="noheader"]
----
(lds)<-[:CALLS_AT]-(x:Stop)-[:NEXT]->*(y:Stop)-[:CALLS_AT]->
  (:Station {name: 'HUDDERSFIELD'})
----

The other node variables are for the `WHERE` clause or for returning data.
Putting this together, the resulting query returns the earliest arrival time achieved by switching to an express service:

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (:Station {name: 'Starbeck'})<-[:CALLS_AT]-
        (a:Stop {departs: time('11:11')})-[:NEXT]->*(b)-[:NEXT]->*
        (c:Stop)-[:CALLS_AT]->(lds:Station {name: 'Leeds'}),
      (b)-[:CALLS_AT]->(l:Station)<-[:CALLS_AT]-(m:Stop)-[:NEXT]->*
        (n:Stop)-[:CALLS_AT]->(lds),
      (lds)<-[:CALLS_AT]-(x:Stop)-[:NEXT]->*(y:Stop)-[:CALLS_AT]->
        (:Station {name: 'Huddersfield'})
WHERE b.arrives < m.departs AND n.arrives < x.departs
RETURN a.departs AS departs,
       l.name AS changeAt,
       m.departs AS changeDeparts,
       y.arrives AS arrives
ORDER BY y.arrives LIMIT 1
----

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

.Result

```

[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="4*<m"]
|===
| departs | changeAt | changeDeparts | arrives

> | 11:11Z | "Harrogate" | 11:20Z | 12:07Z

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| "11:11:00Z" | "Harrogate" | "11:20:00Z" | "12:07:00Z"
```

Browserfying.

  (cov)<-[:CALLS_AT]-(s4:Stop {departs: time('14:45')})-[:NEXT]->(s3),
  (cov)<-[:CALLS_AT]-(s5:Stop {departs: time('09:34')}),
  (eus)<-[:CALLS_AT]-(s6:Stop {departs: time('08:40')})-[:NEXT]->(s5)
----

To illustrate how equijoins work, we will use the problem of finding a round trip between two `Stations`.

In this example scenario, a passenger starts their outbound journey at `London Euston` `Station` and ends at `Coventry` `Station`.
The return journey will be the reverse order of those `Stations`.

The graph has three different services, two of which would compose the desired round trip, and a third which would send the passenger to `Birmingham International`.

The solution is the following path with a cycle:

image::patterns_equijoins_solution2.svg[width="400",role="middle"]

If unique properties exist on the node where the cycle "join" occurs in the path, then it is possible to repeat the node pattern with a predicate matching on the unique property. 
The following motif demonstrates how that can be achieved, repeating a `Station` node pattern with the name `London Euston`:

image::patterns_equijoins_motif.svg[width="700",role="middle"]

The path pattern equivalent is:

> .Query
> [source, syntax]

Reviewer 2: > just a snippet, so it shouldn't have a header.
– @dogofbrian 

```suggestion
[source, role=noheader]
```

----
(:Station {name: 'London Euston'})<-[:CALLS_AT]-(:Stop)-[:NEXT]->(:Stop)
  -[:CALLS_AT]->(:Station {name: 'Coventry'})<-[:CALLS_AT]-(:Stop)
  -[:NEXT]->(:Stop)-[:CALLS_AT]->(:Station {name: 'London Euston'})
----

There may be cases where a unique predicate is not available.
In this case, an equijoin can be used to define the desired cycle by using a repeated node variable.
In the current example, if you declare the same node variable `n` in both the first and last node patterns, then the node patterns _must_ match the same node:

image::patterns_equijoins_motif2.svg[width="700",role="middle"]

Putting this path pattern with an equijoin in a query, the times of the outbound and return journeys can be returned:

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (n:Station {name: 'London Euston'})<-[:CALLS_AT]-(s1:Stop)
  -[:NEXT]->(s2:Stop)-[:CALLS_AT]->(:Station {name: 'Coventry'})
  <-[:CALLS_AT]-(s3:Stop)-[:NEXT]->(s4:Stop)-[:CALLS_AT]->(n)

> RETURN s1.departs+"-"+s2.departs AS outbound, 
>   s3.departs+"-"+s4.departs AS `return`

Reviewer 2: single quotes for string literals
```suggestion
RETURN s1.departs+'-'+s2.departs AS outbound, 
  s3.departs+'-'+s4.departs AS `return`
```

[[node-patterns]]
== Node patterns

Every graph pattern contains at least one node pattern. 
The simplest graph pattern is a single, empty node pattern:

[source, role=noheader]
----
MATCH ()
----

The empty node pattern matches every node in a property graph.
In order to obtain a reference to the nodes matched, a variable needs to be declared in the node pattern:

[source, role=noheader]
----
MATCH (n)
----

With this reference, node properties can be accessed:

[source, role=noheader]
----
MATCH (n)
RETURN n.name
----

Adding a label expression to the node pattern means only nodes with labels that match will be returned.
The following matches nodes that have the `Stop` label:

[source, role=noheader]
----
MATCH (n:Stop)
----

The following more complex label expression matches all nodes that are either a `TrainStation` and a `BusStation` or `StationGroup`:

[source, role=noheader]
----
MATCH (n:(TrainStation&BusStation)|StationGroup)
----

A map of property names and values can be used to match on node properties based on equality with the specified values.
The following matches nodes that have their `mode` property equal to `Rail`:

[source, role=noheader]
----

> MATCH (n { mode: "Rail" }) 

Reviewer 2: Not sure how authoritative it is, the the Cypher styleguide recommends using single quotes for string literals: [Meta-characters](https://neo4j.com/docs/cypher-manual/5/styleguide/#cypher-styleguide-meta-characters)
```suggestion
MATCH (n { mode: 'Rail' }) 
```

----

More general predicates can be expressed with a `WHERE` clause.
The following matches nodes whose name property matches the regular expression `Preston.*`:

[source, role=noheader]
----
MATCH (n:Station WHERE n.name =~ "Preston.*")

> ----

Reviewer 2: Somewhat unrelated to GPM, but one should use `STARTS WITH` over regular expressions wherever possible as it is significantly more performant. Lead by example I guess.
```suggestion
The following matches nodes whose name property starts with `Preston`:

[source, role=noheader]
----
MATCH (n:Station WHERE n.name STARTS WITH 'Preston')
----
```

[[relationship-patterns]]
== Relationship patterns

The simplest possible relationship pattern is a pair of dashes:

[source, role=noheader]
----
--
----

This pattern matches a relationship with any direction and does not filter on any relationship type or property. 
Unlike a node pattern, a relationship pattern cannot be used in a `MATCH` clause without node patterns at both ends. 
See xref:patterns/concepts.adoc#path-patterns[path patterns] for more details.

In order to obtain a reference to the relationships matched by the pattern, a relationship variable needs to be declared in the pattern by adding the variable name in square brackets in between the dashes:

[source, role=noheader]
----
-[r]-
----

To match a specific direction, add `<` or `>` to the left or right hand side respectively:

[source, role=noheader]
----
-[r]->
----

To match on a relationship type, add the type name after a colon:

[source, role=noheader]
----
-[:CALLS_AT]->
----

Similar to node patterns, a map of property names and values can be added to filter on properties of the relationship based on equality with the specified values:

[source, role=noheader]
----

> -[{ distance: 0.24, duration: "PT4M" }]->

Reviewer 2: double quotes for string literal

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-[{ distance: 0.24, duration: 'PT4M' }]->
```

----

A `WHERE` clause can be used for more general predicates:

[source, role=noheader]
----

> -[r WHERE time() + duration(r.duration) < time("22:00") ]->

Reviewer 2: here too, double quotes for string literal

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-[r WHERE time() + duration(r.duration) < time('22:00') ]->
```

----

See the xref:patterns/reference.adoc#relationship-patterns[relationship patterns] reference section for more details. 

[[path-patterns]]
== Path patterns

Any valid path starts and ends with a node, with relationships between each node (if there is more than one node).
Path patterns have the same restrictions, and for all valid path patterns the following are true:

* They have at least one node pattern.
* They begin and end with a node pattern.
* They alternate between nodes and relationships.

These are all valid path patterns:

[source, role=noheader]
----
()
----
[source, role=noheader]
----
(s)--(e)
----
[source, role=noheader]
----

> (:Station)--()<--(m WHERE m.departs > time(12:00))-->()-[:NEXT]->(n)

Reviewer 2: no double quotes here, granted, but no quotes at all!
```suggestion
(:Station)--()<--(m WHERE m.departs > time('12:00'))-->()-[:NEXT]->(n)
```

> (:Station)--()<\--(m WHERE m.departs > time(12:00))\-->()-[:NEXT]->(n)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(:Station)--()<--(m WHERE m.departs > time(12:00))-->()-[:NEXT]->(n)
```

Sorry, it seems the docs build handles our Cypher arrows fine without escaping. The backslashes now appear in the rendered docs.

----

These are invalid path patterns:

[source, role=noheader]
----

> \-->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-->
```

----
[source, role=noheader]
----

> ()\-->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
()-->
```

----
[source, role=noheader]
----

> ()\-->\-->()

Reviewer: ```suggestion
()-->-->()
```

  (cov)<-[:CALLS_AT]-(s5:Stop {departs: time('09:34')}),
  (eus)<-[:CALLS_AT]-(s6:Stop {departs: time('08:40')})-[:NEXT]->(s5)
----

To illustrate how equijoins work, we will use the problem of finding a round trip between two `Stations`.

In this example scenario, a passenger starts their outbound journey at `London Euston` `Station` and ends at `Coventry` `Station`.
The return journey will be the reverse order of those `Stations`.

The graph has three different services, two of which would compose the desired round trip, and a third which would send the passenger to `Birmingham International`.

The solution is the following path with a cycle:

image::patterns_equijoins_solution2.svg[width="400",role="middle"]

If unique properties exist on the node where the cycle "join" occurs in the path, then it is possible to repeat the node pattern with a predicate matching on the unique property. 
The following motif demonstrates how that can be achieved, repeating a `Station` node pattern with the name `London Euston`:

image::patterns_equijoins_motif.svg[width="700",role="middle"]

The path pattern equivalent is:

.Query

> [source, syntax]

Reviewer 2: Should be valid cypher, shouldn't it?
```suggestion
[source, cypher]
```

Reviewer: Actually it is just a snippet, so it shouldn't have a header.

The following query adds a `RETURN` clause that yields the departure and arrival times of the two services:

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (:Station { name: "Denmark Hill" })<-[:CALLS_AT]-(d:Stop)
      ((:Stop)-[:NEXT]->(:Stop)){1,3}
      (a:Stop)-[:CALLS_AT]->(:Station { name: "Clapham Junction" })
RETURN d.departs AS departureTime, a.arrives AS arrivalTime
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===

| departureTime | arrivalTime

| 17:10Z | 17:17Z
| 17:07Z | 17:19Z

2+d|Rows: 2

|===

[[quantified-relationships]]
== Quantified relationships

Quantified relationships allow some simple quantified path patterns to be re-written in a more succinct way.
Continuing with the example of `Stations` and `Stops` from the previous section, consider the following query:

.Query
[source,cypher,role=test-skip-result]
----
MATCH (d:Station { name: "Denmark Hill" })<-[:CALLS_AT]-(n:Stop)
      ((:Stop)-[:NEXT]->(:Stop)){1,10} 
      (m:Stop)-[:CALLS_AT]->(a:Station { name: "Clapham Junction" })
AND m.arrives < time('17:18')

> RETURN n.departs AS departureTime

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MATCH (d:Station { name: "Denmark Hill" })<-[:CALLS_AT]-(n:Stop)
      ((:Stop)-[:NEXT]->(:Stop)){1,10} 
      (m:Stop)-[:CALLS_AT]->(a:Station { name: "Clapham Junction" })
WHERE m.arrives < time('17:18')
RETURN n.departs AS departureTime
```

----

If the relationship `NEXT` only connects `Stop` nodes, the `:Stop` label expressions can be removed:

.Query
[source, cypher, role=test-skip-result]
----
MATCH (d:Station { name: "Denmark Hill" })<-[:CALLS_AT]-(n:Stop)
      (()-[:NEXT]->()){1,10} 
      (m:Stop)-[:CALLS_AT]->(a:Station { name: "Clapham Junction" })
AND m.arrives < time('17:18')

> RETURN n.departs AS departureTime

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MATCH (d:Station { name: "Denmark Hill" })<-[:CALLS_AT]-(n:Stop)
      (()-[:NEXT]->()){1,10} 
      (m:Stop)-[:CALLS_AT]->(a:Station { name: "Clapham Junction" })
WHERE m.arrives < time('17:18')
RETURN n.departs AS departureTime
```

----

When the quantified path pattern has one relationship pattern, it can be abbreviated to a _quantified relationship_.
A quantified relationship is a relationship pattern with a postfix quantifier. 
Below is the previous query rewritten with a quantified relationship:

.Query
[source, cypher, role=test-skip-result]
----
MATCH (d:Station { name: "Denmark Hill" })<-[:CALLS_AT]-
        (n:Stop)-[:NEXT]->{1,10}(m:Stop)-[:CALLS_AT]->
        (a:Station { name: "Clapham Junction" })
AND m.arrives < time('17:18')

> RETURN n.departs AS departureTime

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MATCH (d:Station { name: "Denmark Hill" })<-[:CALLS_AT]-
        (n:Stop)-[:NEXT]->{1,10}(m:Stop)-[:CALLS_AT]->
        (a:Station { name: "Clapham Junction" })
WHERE m.arrives < time('17:18')
RETURN n.departs AS departureTime
```

----

The scope of the quantifier `{1,10}` is the relationship pattern `-[:NEXT]\->` and not the node patterns abutting it.
More generally, where a path pattern contained in a quantified path pattern has the following form:

[source, syntax, role=noheader]
----
(() <relationship pattern> ()) <quantifier>
----

then it can be re-written as follows:

[source, syntax, role=noheader]
----
<relationship pattern> <quantifier>
----

[NOTE]
====

> Prior to the introduction of quantified path patterns and quantified relationships, the only method in Cypher to match paths of a variable length was through variable-length relationship.s 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Prior to the introduction of quantified path patterns and quantified relationships, the only method in Cypher to match paths of a variable length was through variable-length relationships. 
```

This syntax is still available. 
It is very similar to the syntax for quantified relationships, with the following differences:

* Position and syntax of quantifier.
* Semantics of the asterisk symbol.

> * Type expressions are limited to the xref::syntax/operators.adoc#query-operators-boolean[disjunction operator].

Reviewer 2: If you don't know what the disjunction operator is, and you follow the link, you'd be led to believe that it is `OR` and be tempted to write `-[:R OR S*]->` which is obviously wrong.
I'm not sure the link is very useful here, maybe an example would help.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Type expressions are limited to the xref:patterns/reference/#label-expressions[disjunction operator].
```

Note that the index increases from right to left as the path starts at `Denmark Hill`:

image::patterns_group_variables_graph2.svg[width="700", role="middle"]

For this matched path, the group variables have the following bindings:

[source, role=noheader]
----
l => [n2, n3, n4]
r => [r2, r3, r4]
m => [n3, n4, n5]
----

The second solution is the following path:

image::patterns_group_variables_graph3.svg[width="700", role="middle"]

The following table shows the bindings for both matches, including the variable origin.
In contrast to the group variables, `origin` is a singleton variable due to being declared outside the quantification.
Singleton variables bind at most to one node or relationship.

[options="header",cols="4*<m"]
|===

| origin | l | r | m

| n2 | [n2, n3, n4] | [r2, r3, r4] | [n3, n4, n5]
| n7 | [n7] | [r8] | [n8]

|===

Returning to the original goal, which was to return the sequence of depart times for the `Stops` and the total distance of each service, the final query exploits the compatibility of group variables with list comprehensions and list functions such as xref::functions/list#functions-reduce[reduce()]: 

.Query
[source, cypher]
----

> MATCH (:Station {name: "Denmark Hill"})<-[:CALLS_AT]-(origin)
>       ((l)-[r:NEXT]->(m)){1,3}
>       ()-[:CALLS_AT]->(:Station {name: "Clapham Junction"})
> RETURN origin.departs + [stop in m | stop.departs] AS departureTimes,
>        reduce(acc = 0, next in r | acc + next.distance) as totalDistance

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MATCH (:Station {name: "Denmark Hill"})<-[:CALLS_AT]-(origin)
      ((l)-[r:NEXT]->(m)){1,3}
      ()-[:CALLS_AT]->(:Station {name: "Clapham Junction"})
RETURN origin.departs + [stop in m | stop.departs] AS departureTimes,
       reduce(acc = 0.0, next in r | round(acc + next.distance, 2)) AS totalDistance
```

This fixes the mismatch between actual = 1.4000000000000001 and expected = 1.4.

[[node-patterns]]
== Node patterns

Every graph pattern contains at least one node pattern. 
The simplest graph pattern is a single, empty node pattern:

[source, syntax, role=noheader]
----
MATCH ()
----

The empty node pattern matches every node in a property graph.
In order to obtain a reference to the nodes matched, a variable needs to be declared in the node pattern:

[source, syntax, role=noheader]
----
MATCH (n)
----

With this reference, node properties can be accessed:

[source, syntax, role=noheader]
----
MATCH (n)
RETURN n.name
----

Adding a label expression to the node pattern means only nodes with labels that match will be returned.
The following matches nodes that have the `Stop` label:

[source, syntax, role=noheader]
----
MATCH (n:Stop)
----

The following more complex label expression matches all nodes that are either a `TrainStation` and a `BusStation` or `StationGroup`:

[source, syntax, role=noheader]
----
MATCH (n:(TrainStation&BusStation)|StationGroup)
----

A map of property names and values can be used to match on node properties based on equality with the specified values.

> The following matches nodes that have their mode property equal to `Rail`:

Reviewer: Style "mode"

Reviewer: Should "Rail" be quoted?

Author: We use monospace (``) for references to words in the code examples, so I believe so. Will double check.

Reviewer: OK I found an example [here](https://neo4j.com/docs/cypher-manual/current/syntax/expressions/), where `'Daniel'` is just written `Daniel`.

> The following matches nodes that have their mode property equal to `Rail`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following matches nodes that have their `mode` property equal to `Rail`:
```

More general predicates can be expressed with a `WHERE` clause.
The following matches nodes whose name property matches the regular expression `Preston.*`:

[source, syntax, role=noheader]
----
MATCH (n:Station WHERE n.name =~ "Preston.*")
----

See the xref:patterns/reference.adoc#node-pattern[node pattern] reference section for more details. 

[[rel-patterns]]
== Relationship patterns

The simplest possible relationship pattern is a pair of dashes:

[source, syntax, role=noheader]
----
--
----

This pattern matches a relationship with any direction and does not filter on any relationship type or property. 
Unlike a node pattern, a relationship pattern cannot be used in a `MATCH` clause without node patterns at both ends. 
See xref:patterns/concepts.adoc#path-patterns[] for more details.

In order to obtain a reference to the relationships matched by the pattern, a relationship variable needs to be declared in the pattern by adding the variable name in square brackets in between the dashes:

[source, syntax, role=noheader]
----
-[r]-
----

To match a specific direction, add `<` or `>` to the left or right hand side respectively:

[source, syntax, role=noheader]
----
-[r]->
----

> To match on a relationship type, its name is added after a colon:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To match on a relationship type, add the type name after a colon:
```

Reviewer: This is consistent with the form of the previous sentences.

[source, syntax, role=noheader]
----
-[:CALLS_AT]->
----

Similar to node patterns, a map of property names and values can be added to filter on properties of the relationship based on equality with the specified values:

[source, syntax, role=noheader]
----
-[{ distance: 0.24, duration: "PT4M" }]->
----

A `WHERE` clause can be used for more general predicates:

[source, syntax, role=noheader]
----
-[r WHERE time() + duration(r.duration) < time("22:00") ]->
----

See the xref:patterns/reference.adoc#rel-pattern[relationship pattern] reference section for more details. 

[[path-patterns]]
== Path patterns

Any valid path starts and ends with a node, with relationships between each node (if there is more than one node).
Path patterns have the same restrictions, and for all valid path patterns the following are true:

* They have at least one node pattern.
* They begin and end with a node pattern.
* They alternate between nodes and relationships.

[options="header"cols="2a,1a"]
|===
| Valid path patterns | Invalid path patterns 

| `()` | `->`
| `(s)-(e)` | `()->`

> | `(:Station)-()<-(m WHERE m.departs > time(12:00))->()-[:NEXT]->(n)` | `()->->()`

Reviewer: Are the arrow ligatures only appearing in github's adoc rendering? Hopefully that is the case, as it hides what the exact characters you would type to get valid / invalid patterns.

== Path pattern matching 

This section contains an example of matching a path pattern to paths in a property graph.

The following code block is used for the example:

[source,cypher, role=test-setup]
----
CREATE (pmr:Station {name: 'Peckham Rye'}),
  (dmk:Station {name: 'Denmark Hill'}),
  (vic:Station {name: 'London Victoria'}),
  (clp:Station {name: 'Clapham High Street'}),
  (eph:Station {name: 'Elephant & Castle'}),
  (vic)<-[:CALLS_AT]-(s1:Stop {departs: time('11:55')}),
  (dmk)<-[:CALLS_AT]-(s2:Stop {departs: time('11:44')})-[:NEXT]->(s1),
  (pmr)<-[:CALLS_AT]-(s3:Stop {departs: time('11:40')})-[:NEXT]->(s2),
  (clp)<-[:CALLS_AT]-(s4:Stop {departs: time('11:41')}),
  (dmk)<-[:CALLS_AT]-(s5:Stop {departs: time('11:37')})-[:NEXT]->(s4),
  (pmr)<-[:CALLS_AT]-(s6:Stop {departs: time('11:33')})-[:NEXT]->(s5),
  (eph)<-[:CALLS_AT]-(s7:Stop {departs: time('11:54')}),
  (dmk)<-[:CALLS_AT]-(s8:Stop {departs: time('11:47')})-[:NEXT]->(s7),
  (pmr)<-[:CALLS_AT]-(s9:Stop {departs: time('11:44')})-[:NEXT]->(s8)
----

It creates the following graph:

image::path_pattern_example_graph.svg[width="600",role="middle"]

The graph contains a number of train `Stations` and `Stops`.

> A `Stop` represents arrivnal and departure of a train that `CALLS_AT` a `Station`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A `Stop` represents the arrival and departure of a train that `CALLS_AT` a `Station`. 
```

The graph shows three chains of `Stops` that represent different train services. 
Each of these services calls at the `Station` with the name `Denmark Hill`.

To return all `Stops` that call at the `Station` `Denmark Hill`, the following _motif_ is used (the term motif is used to describe the pattern looked for in the graph):

image::path_pattern_motif.svg[width="600",role="middle"]

In this case, three path patterns in the graph match the structure of the motif (plus the predicate anchoring to the `Station` `Denmark Hill`).
The first 

image::path_pattern_solutions.svg[width="700",role="middle"]

In order to return the name of each `Stop` that calls at a `Station`, declare a variable in the `Stop` node pattern.
The results will then have a row containing the departs value of each `Stop` for each match shown above:

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (s:Stop)-[:CALLS_AT]->(:Station {name: "Denmark Hill"})
RETURN s.departs AS departureTime
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="1*<m"]
|===
| +departureTime+

| +"11:44:00Z"+
| +"11:47:00Z"+
| +"11:37:00Z"+

1+d|Rows: 3
|===

> [[patterns-shortestpath]]

Reviewer: I guess the to-be-written var-length relationships would go just before this section?

Author: I think that would make sense, yes.

The path pattern equivalent is:

[source, syntax, role=noheader]
----
(n:Station {name: "London Euston"})<-[:CALLS_AT]-(:Stop)-[:NEXT]->(:Stop)
  -[:CALLS_AT]->(:Station {name: "Coventry"})<-[:CALLS_AT]-(:Stop)
  -[:NEXT]->(:Stop)-[:CALLS_AT]->(:Station)
----

As the only predicate on the final node pattern is the label `Station` (represented by yellow color in the motif), the motif will match one solution too many:

image::patterns_equijoins_solution.svg[width="700",role="middle"]

One possibility for forcing the final node pattern to match on the origin `Station` `Euston` is to add a predicate matching on the `name` property of final node in the motif:

image::patterns_equijoins_motif2.svg[width="700",role="middle"]

If this is done, the path pattern equivalent is:

[source, syntax, role=noheader]
----
(n:Station {name: "London Euston"})<-[:CALLS_AT]-(:Stop)-[:NEXT]->(:Stop)
  -[:CALLS_AT]->(:Station {name: "Coventry"})<-[:CALLS_AT]-(:Stop)
  -[:NEXT]->(:Stop)-[:CALLS_AT]->(:Station {name: "London Euston"})
----

An alternative is to use an _equijoin_ to ensure that the first and last node patterns match the same node and the overall pattern matches return journeys. 

> Specifically, if the same node variable (`n`) is declared in both the first and last node patterns, then the node patterns _must_ match the same node:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Specifically, if the same node variable `(n)` is declared in both the first and last node patterns, then the node patterns _must_ match the same node:
```
